On the Effects of Solar Panels on Distribution Transformers 
Mohamed A. Awadallah, Tianqi Xu, Bala Venkatesh, Senior Member, IEEE,and BirendraN.Singh 
Abstract—Energypolicies worldwide aremandatinglarge-scaleintegrationofsolarpanel(SP) generators with inverters on distri­butionsystems. ThiscausesseveralSPstobeconnectedtoadistri­bution transformer. The SP and its interfacing inverter alter the performancecharacteristicsofthetransformer. Inaddition,when newsourcesandloadsareconnectedtoadistributionsystem,from an asset-management perspective, it is imperative to understand and quantify their effect on distribution system components. This paperpresentsatwo-stepstudyontheeffectsofSPondistributiontransformersviasimulationandexperiments.Instepone,thesim­ulation work quanti.es the amount ofharmonic distortion causedby SP andassociatedinvertersindistribution transformerscon­sideringsolarfarmsandrooftopresidentialinstallations.Thesim­ulation work uses network topology, load, and generation data of a Canadian utility. Various inverter technologies, output powers, carrier signal frequencies, .ltering techniques, numbers of active inverters,andtransformercon.gurationsarestudied.Insteptwo,level of harmonic distortion observed in simulation is created in a laboratoryenvironmentusingacommercialinverterforSPappli­cations.Athree-phasedry-typetransformeristestedtoobservetheeffectofhigherharmonicdistortiononcoreandwindingtempera­turesofthetransformer.Experimentalresultsconcludethatundertheworstcaseloadingscenario(i.e.,fullloadwithactivepower.owreversed),thetransformerlifetimeexpectancyisanticipatedtode­crease by 8.3%. 
Index Terms—Distribution transformers, harmonics, inverters, lifetime expectancy, photovoltaic, solar panels. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
R
ENEWABLE sources, such as solar, wind, tidal, 
geothermal, biomass, and wave powers provide the rescuing solution to all energy problems of the world as fossil fuels come to an end. Solar energy comes next to wind as the 
Manuscript received February 09, 2015; revised April 28, 2015; accepted June 06, 2015. Date of publication June 17, 2015; date of current version May 20, 2016. This work was supported in part by Hydro One under a Grant to Bala Venkatesh at the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University. Paper no. TPWRD-00184-2015. 
M. A. Awadallah is with the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 Canada, on leave from the University of Zagazig, Zagazig 44516, Egypt (e-mail: awadalla@ryerson.ca). 
T. Xu is with the School of Electrical and Information Technology, Yunnan Minzu University, Yunnan 650500,China (e-mail:tianqi.xu@aliyun.com). 
B. Venkatesh is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi­neering, and Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 Canada (e-mail: bala@ryerson.ca). 
B. N. Singh was with the Hydro One, Toronto, ON M5G 2P5, Canada, and also with the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 Canada (e-mail: bnsingh@ryerson.ca). 
Colorversionsofoneormoreofthe.guresinthispaperareavailableonline at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identi.er 10.1109/TPWRD.2015.2443715 
fastest-developing renewable source [1]. Driven by incentives andeaseofinstallation,rooftopsolarpanels(SPs)arebecoming popular in both downtown and suburban residential areas worldwide. Small rooftop installations of SP produce power in the kilowatt range, while large solar farms can generate several megawatts. In both cases, inverters are used for power conversion from dc to ac. SP sources in this class are usually connected to distribution systems. The use of inverters always causes voltage distortion and injects current harmonicsinto the system.Inaddition,connectedSPsintroduceadditionalsources on distribution system lines, which reduce power .ow from traditional supplies and can cause reverse power .ow. 
The immediate effects of SP and their associated inverters would be on the distribution transformer, which is designed to supply linear loads at a rated frequency. Voltage and current harmonics are expected to yield extra core and winding losses and, hence, higher temperature rise. If the temperature at the windinghottest-spotincreasesaboveanormalvalue,insulation degradationwillbepossible,leadingtoashortenedlifetimeand earlier breakdown of the transformer. 
Thestudyofharmonicsintermsofsources,effects,.ltration, and mitigation has been constantly attracting the attention of electricalpowersystemresearchers.Theeffectofpowersystem harmonicsontheperformanceandlifetimeofdistributiontrans­formersisaddressedinmanypublications [2]–[14]. A calcula­tion routine of the reduced per-unit load at which distribution transformers maintain full lifetime under current harmonics is presentedin[2].Harmoniceffectsontransformerlossesarecal­culated under current distortion, and a loading pro.le is pro­posed in order not to compromise lifetime expectancy [3]. The in.uence on winding hottest-spot temperature and transformer lifetime, as a result of power loss increase, is evaluated in [4]. Moses et al. [5]studytheeffectsofharmonicsgeneratedbythe plug-in electric vehicles’ charging stationonthe feedingdis­tribution transformer. It is recommended to either derate the transformer operating in such conditions or to install a power-quality (PQ) compensation device, such as active .lter, to mit­igate harmful effects. 
Voltage and current harmonics caused by various nonlinear lighting loads are presented in [6] and the de-rating of the dis­tribution transformer is accordingly proposed. In [7], the .nite element method is used to calculate the hottest-spot tempera­turethrough.eldstrengthsolutionatdifferentpartsofthetrans­former. The change in the temperature rise due to harmonics is usedtoestimatethelifetimeexpectancy,andanewloadingpro­.letokeeplifetimeunaffectedisproposed.Loadlossesaremea­sured for a .ve-limb converter transformer at different supply frequenciesandconverter.ringangles[8].Newstray-loadand 

0885-8977 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. 
eddy-currentlossfactorsareproposedintermsofharmonicfre­quencyand.ringangle.Alaboratorysetupisproposedtomea­surelossesofhighswitchingfrequencyconvertertransformers, and compare to those computed through .nite elements [9]. 
An inverter is used to feed the transformer, which is loaded with nonlinear loads in order to generate current harmonics [10]. The change in losses under such condition is evaluated through short-circuit and open-circuit tests. In [11], electrical and thermal parameters of distribution transformers, including top-oil and hottest-spot temperatures, are assessed in a har­monicenvironment.Measuringcoretemperatureswithresistive and nonlinear loads, it is found that current total harmonic distortion (THD) of 20% and 60% result in increase of core temperature of 20% and 50%, respectively [12]. Choudhury et al. [13] examine the effect of supply voltage distortion on transformer excitation current, where the phase angles of voltage harmonics have more impact than the magnitudes on the corresponding current harmonics. An expansion of the standard K-factor is able to estimate the composite harmonic current caused by multiple linear and nonlinearloads [14]. 
Effects of solar photovoltaic (PV) panels on the distribution networks are also studied [15]–[18]. The replacement of 30% oftheincandescentlampsbycompact.uorescentlamps,forthe sakeofenergysaving,resultsin8%voltageTHDinaweaknet­work supplied by SP [15]. Voltage THD may reach 31% if the replacement is for 90% of the lighting load. Voltage and cur­rent THD of the accommodating network remain within stan­dard limits even if all SP of the Sydney Olympic Village are simultaneously functioning [16]. Impact of SP on voltage har­monicsofpower networks at two Greek islandsis addressed in [17], and compared to the case of Diesel generator supplies. In [18], the effect of solar panels and associated inverters on the power quality of distribution networks and transformers is in­vestigated.Casesofunbalancedoperationofdistributiontrans­formers are studied through simulation and experimentation. 
Upon integrating a PV system to a power grid, the harmonic distortion of voltage and current is mainly caused by the in­verter. Rigorous research efforts have been recently devoted to the enhancement of the topology, performance, and control of PV system inverters [19]–[24]. Inherent system redundancy is increased through distributed control of fault-tolerant modular multilevel inverters for PV applications [19]. Output harmonic content of multilevel inverters connected to SPs is minimized through the generation of switching angles by arti.cial neural networks(ANNs)[20].In[21],thenumberofpower-electronic components in an SP multilevel inverter is reduced by using a laddered architecture. An integrated dc/dc converter is em­ployed in [22] to interface SP to microgrids via an energy de­livery and management system. Maximum power is harvested from SPs at the unity power factor through a battery-assisted quasi-Z-source inverter which controls the SP voltage by in­troducing shoot-through states [23]. For a single-phase grid­tiedPVsystem,constantpoweroperationandmaximumpower tracking are concurrently achieved via a boost converter and line-commutated inverter as an interface [24]. Fixed .ring an­glesoftheinverterkeepthedc-linkvoltageconstant,whilemax­imumpowerisabsorbedthroughdutyratiocontroloftheboost converter. 
It appears that literature work separately considers harmonic effects on distribution transformers, SP impact on voltage and current distortion, and the development of inverter technology. Accordingly, research considering the direct impact of SP on distribution transformers, especially in a distributed generation and harmonic-contaminated environment, is missing. More­over, from an asset-management perspective of utilities, it is imperative to understand the effects of new sources and loads on distribution system components. 
In this paper, the effects of voltage and current harmonics causedbySPinvertersontheperformanceofdistributiontrans­formers, especially during second quadrant operation resulting from a reversal of active power due to generation exceeding load, are studied in a two-step process. In step one, many technical issues are addressed, including different inverter topologies, carrier frequency, output power, .ltering tech­niques, number of active inverters, and transformer winding con.guration. The impact of such factors on harmonic distor­tionofvoltageandcurrentwaveformsisstudiedviasimulation of a real distribution system. Step one quanti.es the amount of harmonicdistortionindistributiontransformersunderdifferent factors. 
In step two, transformer performance is measured in the laboratory under normal and SP operation scenarios. The measurements are used to verify simulation results concerning the impact of output power and winding con.guration on harmonic levels. Two reasons are behind the selection of these two factors, in particular, for experimental veri.cation: practi­calityandinterestof utilities.Thereafter,insteptwo,measured core and winding temperatures areemployedtoevaluatethe lifetime expectancy. Under worst case operating conditions, the transformer lifetime is expected to reduce by 8.3%. 
This paper answers two vital questions, which have been askedbytheutilitiesforquitesometime.Thequestionsconcern theimpactonperformancecharacteristicsandexpectedlifetime of distribution transformers due to reverse active power .ow and harmonic contamination caused by SPs. Findings of this research warn utilities against a condition where the capacity of the SP connected to a distribution transformer is equal to or exceeds its rating. In case such a condition is inevitable, care should be taken about transformer operation with full load in the second quadrant. Energy-storage elements may be used on theSPsideofthetransformerinordertoavoidfull-loadreverse power .owing into the distribution network. 
II. STEP ONE—SIMULATION AND RESULTS 

AnassessmentoftheimpactofSPandassociatedinverterson waveform distortion is .rst studied. A Matlab/Simulink model forasolarfarmandaccommodatingdistributionsystem(Fig.1) is built based on actual data of the Canadian utility. The trans­mission system is modeled as a 170-MVA, 115-kV three-phase supply, and a 5-MVA, 27.6/0.6-kV three-phase transformer is modeledtoconnectthe100-kWsolarfarmintothedistribution network. The system incorporates a dc converter, employing a maximumpowerpointtracking(MPPT)algorithm,three-phase inverter, and an LC .lter as shown in Fig. 1. Voltage and cur­rent THD at Buses 1 and 2 are monitored. The effects of SP on 

Fig. 1. General model for the solar farm. 
TABLE I VOLTAGE AND CURRENT THD FOR DIFFERENT INVERTER TECHNOLOGIES 

waveform distortion are studied concerning different technical issues. 
A. Effect of Inverter Technologies 
In order to compare the effects of different inverter tech­nologies on the network, three inverter topologies, two control schemes, and two power-electronic devices are used. Two-level, three-level, and double three-level inverters using insulated-gatebipolartransistors(IGBT)andmetal-oxide-semi­conductor .eld-effect transistors (MOSFET), and employing phase-to-ground and phase-to-phase voltage control are simu­lated.Theobjectiveistoexamineharmonicdistortionofvoltage and current waveforms under different invertertechnologies. 
Voltage and current THD results are shown in Table I. It is concluded from total harmonic distortion (THD) values that using an IGBT or MOSFET has the same effect on waveform distortion. It is also noted that phase-to-ground voltage control giveslessvoltageTHDandalmostequalcurrentTHDtophase­to-phase voltage control. In terms of the inverter topology, the double three level gives less THD than three-level inverters. However, a double three-level inverter employs twice as many devices as a three-level inverter. On the other hand, the two­levelinverteryieldshighervoltageandcurrentTHD,whichcan exceed the 5% IEEE standard limit given in [25]. Accordingly, the three-level topology dominates the industry of three-phase inverters for solar applications. 
B. Effect of Output Power 
The effects of SP output power, which is dependent on solar irradiationandcelltemperature,onwaveformdistortionarein­vestigated.Fig.2showsthevariationofTHDagainstSPpower. It is apparent that voltage THD on both sides does not change remarkably with output power, and is always within the stan­dard limit of 5% [25]. However, current THD is high at small values of output power, and decreases with increasing power until they go below the standard limit around rated power. It is anticipated that voltage THD may not be greatly affected by SP power where the ratio between rated SP output and system powercarryingcapacityislow,thatis,wherethesystempower carryingcapacityisseveraltimestheratedSPoutputatthepoint ofcommoncoupling(PCC).Thus,themodelisrunfordifferent SP ratings, where average voltage and current THD are given inTableII. ItisevidentthattherelativeratingofSP,referredto as system capacity, in.uences the average voltage and current THD. Nevertheless, voltage andcurrent THD seem to have ac­ceptable values for low relative SP ratings as well. 


C. Effect of Carrier Signal Frequency 
The dominant switching technique in three-phase inverters manufacturing is pulsewidth modulation (PWM). The instan­taneous magnitude of a triangular carrier signal is compared to that of a sinusoidal control signal in order to determine the switching logic. The frequency of the carrier signal sets forth the harmonic content of the output waveform of the inverter. It also determines the switching frequency and switching loss of inverter devices, and in.uences noise and interference with nearby circuits and systems. 
The frequency of the PWM carrier signal is varied, while voltageand currentTHDaremonitoredandplottedinFig.3. It isclearthatvoltageandcurrentTHDonbothsidesofthetrans­former decrease as carrier frequency increases. Certain carrier frequencies result in all THD values being below the standard 




Fig. 4. Variation of THD with cutoff frequency. 
limit. However, the carrier frequency should be carefully se­lectedsinceitaffectsswitchinglosses.Industrialpracticesstate that IGBTs are dominant in medium power and voltage appli­cations. The switching frequency is then in the low kilohertz range, typically between 3 kHz and 10 kHz. 
D. Effect of Filtering Techniques 
All inverter manufacturers are keen on designing effective passive.lterssuchthattheoutputoftheirinverterisminimally distorted. The cutoff frequency of the .lter is a vital factor in determining which harmonic components will be .ltered out, and deciding on the size and cost of .lter elements. A second-order low-pass .lter is used in the simulation model as shown in Fig. 1. The cutoff frequency of the .lter is varied, while the voltage and currentTHD are recorded and plotted in Fig. 4. 
Voltage THD on both sides of the transformer is always less than standard limit; however, voltage THD decreases as the .lter cutoff frequency decreases. Current THD on both sides seems to be more affected by cutoff frequency; they reach a minimum of about 17% as the cutoff frequency becomes 


Fig. 5. Variation of THD with the number of active inverters. 
almostthreetimes the powerfrequency. Itshould be noted that as cutoff frequency increases, more harmonic components can penetrate through the network. On the other hand, the size, weight, and cost of .lter components dramatically increase as cutoff frequency is reduced. In addition, the fundamental component of the output voltage becomes more attenuated as cutoff frequency decreases. Therefore, cutoff frequency of the passive .lter should be carefully designed in order to best compromise such merits and demerits. Cutoff frequency is typically chosen at about one-tenth of the device switching frequency. Accordingly, in case of IGBT inverters, the cutoff frequency of the output .lter is less than 1 kHz. 
E. Effect of the Number of Active Inverters 
The single SP and one inverter of the model of Fig. 1 are broken down to 16 pairs of SPs and inverters at a lower rating inordertorepresentanactualcase.Theeffectofthenumberof activeinvertersatatimeonthewaveformdistortionisexplored. Voltage and current THD on both sides of the transformer are plottedagainst the numberofactive invertersin Fig. 5. Voltage THDisalwayslessthanthestandardlimit,whilecurrentTHDis higherthanthelimitwhenfewinvertersareactive.CurrentTHD becomes a less than standard limit when the number of active invertersissevenormore.However,itshould be noticedthat a clearsharppeakofcurrentTHDonbothsidesandvoltageTHD onthesecondarysidetakesplacewhenthenumberofactivein­verters is four. The reason is believed to be the resonance be­tweenLC.ltersofactiveinverters.Tovalidatesuchreasoning, the.lterparametersarechangedforallinverters,andthesimu­lation is repeated. Consequently, the peak THD point moves to correspond to six inverters. When .lter parameters vary again, the peak THD point occurs at two active inverters. Therefore, .lter designers and system operators should avoid this condi­tion because of its harmful re.ection on THD values. 
F. Effect of Transformer Winding Con.guration 
The effects of different winding connections and vector groups on waveform distortion are examined, while core sat­uration is modeled. Table III shows THD values of primary 
TABLE III VOLTAGE AND CURRENT AVERAGE THD FOR DIFFERENT TRANSFORMER CONNECTIONS AND VECTOR GROUPS 

and secondary voltage and current at different winding con.g­urations. It is evident that the primary voltage THD is almost independent of the transformer winding con.guration since it is predominantly controlled by the grid since the grid is strong relative to the SP (ratio of short-circuit levels). Also, it seems that grounding of the neutral point does not affect the voltage orcurrentTHD.However,thevectorgroupofwindingconnec­tions appears to have a signi.cant in.uence on the harmonic level. If the primary winding of a distribution transformer is delta and the secondary star grounded, the results denote that the vector group yields one less THD than 11. 
III. STEP TWO—EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
The experimental work aims at testing SP effects on three-phase transformers through a laboratory setup. The ef­fects of reverse active power .ow and harmonics generated by SP inverters are to be particularly addressed. The impact of load power change and transformer winding con.guration on voltage and current THD levels is shown in order to verify simulation results. Through the experimental study, variations of steady-state core and winding temperatures are tracked in order to ultimately asses the transformer lifetime. 
A three-phase grid-tied commercially available inverter for SPapplicationsisusedtofeedthesecondarywindingofathree­phase dry-type transformer, whose primary is connected to the grid. The inverterappliesTHE maximum power point tracking (MPPT)algorithmovertwochannels,whichcouldbeseparately fed from two SPS, or paralleled to the same one. The inverter has a second-order passive .lter, which helps reduce distortion of the output waveforms. This inverter is selected from dif­ferentmarketalternativessincetheTHDofitsoutputvoltageis below the 5% IEEE standard limit [25]. The winding con.gu­rationofthetransformervariesbetweenD/y-1,D/yg-1,Y/d-11, and Yg/d-11. The dc source supplying the inverter can run in a current mode to best representthe constant currentcharacter­istic of SP. The setup is shown in Fig. 6. The secondary-side three-phase inductor maintains reactive power .ow from the grid, while active power .ows into the grid, in order to signify second-quadrant operation of the transformer. 
Two three-phase PQ analyzers are used to measure voltage andcurrentTHDonbothsidesofthetransformeraswellasac­tive,reactive,andtotalpowers.Coreandwindingtemperatures are also measured via two independent thermocouples, where readings are obtained by a data logging module connected to a personal computer. The transformer is tested under SP opera­tion through the setup of Fig. 6; it is also tested under normal 

Fig. 6. Experimental setup. (a) Schematic. (b) Picture. 
conditions when supplied by a sinusoidal source feeding con­stant linear load. 
The effect of SP power and transformer winding con.gura­tiononwaveform distortionistested. VoltageandcurrentTHD aremeasured under normal and SP operations with allpossible winding con.gurations. Voltage and current THD are plotted in Fig. 7 against inverter power for a D/y connection. Voltage THDisalwayslessthanthestandardlimitalthoughitincreases withloading underSPoperation.Thisincrease in voltageTHD with loading is believed to be due to the increasing harmonic dropacrossthefeedercableandtransformerleakageimpedance when the distorted load current increases. Current THD under normal operation is always less than the limit. However, under SP operation, current THD reaches a high value at light load, then decreases with loading until it becomes within the stan­dard limit close to full load. 



Fig. 7. Variation of THD with loading under normal and SP operation. 
(a) Voltage. (b) Current. 
Theprimary(gridside)andsecondary(inverterside)voltage and current THD under SP operation are shown in Figs. 8 and 9 for Y/d and Yg/d connections, respectively. Voltage and current THD maintain the same trend of change versus SP power. Slight and inconclusive differences exist between corresponding values indicating that grounding of the neutral point doesnothave a signi.cantin.uence onwaveform distor­tion. Experimental measurements of voltage and current THD, shown in Figs. 7–9, acceptably match and verify simulation results giveninFig.2 andTable III. 
IV. STEP TWO—COMPUTATION OF LIFETIME EXPECTANCY 

Thetemperatureriseofanyelectricaldeviceorequipmentis a key factor determining its lifetime. Distribution transformers are no exception. The winding insulation, which is the weakest thermalpoint,isnormallydesignedwithaspeci.cthermalclass such that the temperature at the hottest spot of the winding should not exceed a certain value. The location of the hottest winding spot in a transformer during its operation is normally unknown, and is very dif.cult to determine (determined only through the postfailure postmortem). 



Fig. 9. Variation of THD with loading with the Yg/d connection and SP operation. 
Thebasicloadingconditionsofa transformerfornormallife expectancy are [26] as follows. 
1) The transformer is continuously loaded at rated kilovolt amperes and rated voltage. 
2) The average temperature of cooling air during any 24-h periodisequalto30 
C,andthemaximumtemperatureof cooling air at no time exceeds 40 
C. 
3) The altitude does not exceed 1000 m (3300 ft). 

In dry-type transformers, the hottest-spot winding tem­perature is the direct sum of ambient temperature, average winding temperature rise, and hottest-spot allowance [26]. It is therefore indicated that a change in any of these three components results in an equal change in the temperature of thehottestwindingspot.Thisfactisnoteworthybecauseitsets forth the basis for lifetime computation under SP operation. It is also stated in [26] that for a dry-type transformer with a temperature class of 220 
C, the hottest-spot temperature of the winding has been assumed to be 210 
C if the three basic loading conditions mentioned earlier are maintained (accepted norm and standard). Such hottest-spot temperature is expected toyieldanormallifetimeexpectancyof20years[26].Itshould also be highlighted that the guidelines given in [26] leave 10 



C allowance, or a safety margin, between the design thermal class speci.cation and the operating temperature at the hottest winding spot for any dry-type transformer. 
Core and windingtemperaturesof thetransformer undertest aremeasuredinseparateexperimentsduringnormalandSPop­eration. Temperatures are recorded every ten minutes and are longenoughtoreachathermalsteadystateorclose.At8.5-kW load, Fig. 10 shows the core and winding temperatures under normal (i.e., sinusoidal source without integration of SP) and under SP operation. Winding temperatures seem comparable, while core temperature under SP operation is slightly higher than normal conditions. The reason is the strong dependence of core loss on the frequency of applied voltage. The small in­creaseincoretemperatureunderSPoperationindicatesslightly higher core loss and lower ef.ciency. 
The same plots are shown in Fig. 11 at the 10-kVA trans­former full load with second-quadrant operation. Core temper­ature under SP operation maintains the same slight increase above the normal operation case. Although winding tempera­turesappeartobealmostequal,carefulinspectionofthetemper­aturevaluesindicatesasteady-statedifferenceof1.2 
Cinfavor of SPoperation.Itisofinteresttoknowthepotentialimpactof suchasmallincreaseinwindingtemperatureonthelifetimeex­pectancy of distribution transformers. It should be also noticed thatalthoughtheloadofFig.10is85%oftheloadofFig.11,the steady-statewinding temperature of Fig. 10 is less than 70% of the steady-state winding temperature of Fig. 11. Therefore, the correlation between steady-statewinding temperatureriseand load level is not linear. Average values of the voltage and cur­rentTHDduringtheloadingexperimentsofFigs.10and11are given in Table IV. It is apparent that waveforms are more dis­torted at 8.5-kW than the 10-kVA load. However, the effect of harmonic distortion on temperature rise is more signi.cant at the full load of 10 kVA. The reason is that the winding is at its permissible temperature limit under full-load operation so that anyconsistentincreaseintemperaturewoulddirectlyaffectthe transformer lifetime. 
TABLE IV AVERAGE THD AT 8.5-kW AND 10-kVA LOADING CONDITIONS 

The winding temperature curves of Fig. 11 are of particular signi.cance since they constitute the basis for lifetime com­putation under SP operation. It should be emphasized that the winding temperature measured in the laboratory and plotted in Fig. 11 cannot be claimed to be the hottest-spot temperature. Nevertheless, the change in such measured temperature, from normaltoSPoperation,indicatesanequalchangeinthehottest spot of the winding as indicated in [26]. Since the transformer under consideration is of the 220 
class, it is accordingly as­sumed that the hottest-spot temperature at nominal load and voltage is 210 
C [26]. The reason behind such an assumption is that the basic loading conditions for normal life expectancy mentioned earlier are maintained during the normal operation case of Fig. 11. The hottest-spot temperature under SP opera­tion is therefore 1.2 
C higher than the normal case, according to the measurements. For a 220 
C temperature class dry-type transformer,thelifetimeexpectancyinhours isgivenin[26]in terms of the absolute hottest-spot temperature 
as 
Life 



(1) 
AccordingtotheresultsandtestingproceduresofthisPAPER aswellastheguidelinesgivenin[26],asystematicmechanism to compute transformer lifetime under SP operation could be formulated as follows. 
1) Load the transformer from a sinusoidal power supply, maintaining the basic loading conditions for normal life expectancy. 
2) Measurethewindingtemperatureatanypointuntilthermal steady state is reached. 

TABLE V EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATIONS OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

3) Assume that the hottest spot winding temperature is equal to the transformer thermal class minus the 10 
C allowance. 
4) Loadthetransformer,inaseparateexperiment,fromanSP supplymaintainingthebasicloadingconditionsfornormal life expectancy. 
5) Measure the winding temperature at the same point until thermal steady state is reached. 
6) Find the steady-state temperature difference between SP and normal operations. 
7) Add the temperature difference to the normal hottest spot temperature, of step 3, in order to estimate the winding hottest spot temperature under SP operation. 
8) SubstitutethehottestspottemperatureofSPoperationinto 

(1) 
to compute lifetime expectancy. Therefore, substituting T as 483 
K, standing for 210 
C, in 


(1) 
yields a lifetime of 20 years, which is considered the ex­pected lifetime under normal full-load operation as given in [26].However,whenTis484.2 
K,standingforthenormal210 



Cplusthe1.2 
CriseduetoSPoperation,lifetimeexpectancy becomes 18.336 years. Thus, lifetime expectancy of the trans­formerisanticipatedtoreduceby8.3%ifcontinuouslyoperated inthesecondquadrantatfullloadwiththeSPinverter.Thisisa key.ndingofthispaperandhaslongnaggedelectricaldistribu­tionutilitiesthatexperiencepower-.owreversalsandharmonic distortionontheirsystemsduetohighpenetrationofrenewable generation, such as solar and wind. 
V. ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS 

The results presented in this paper are based on some as­sumptions in simulation and experimentation. The simulation modelassumesbalancedthree-phaseoperation;casesofimbal­ancearenotconsidered.Modelingoftheinverterassumesiden­tical power-electronic switches and neglects switching losses. Passive components of the .lters are assumed ideal by disre­garding inductor and capacitor losses. Sinusoidal PWM is al­waysused forinverterswitching.Transformerloadingtestsare conductedforaperiodoftimelongenoughtoreachsteady-state temperature.Ondifferenttransformertestingexperiments,tem­peratures aremeasured at theexactsame points of the core and winding. 
The results of lifetime reduction are generally limited to dry-type transformers; oil-immersed transformers have different loading guidelines and lifetime calculations [27]. The expected lifetime reduction of 8.3% is true for dry-type transformers of the 220 
C thermal class, which experience waveform distortion as quanti.ed in this paper, leading to a consistentincreaseofthehottestwindingspotby1.2 
Cabove normal on the steady state. For other transformer design spec­i.cations or loading conditions, steady-state temperature has to be compared between normal and new operations. The procedural stepsmentioned earlierhaveto be followed toeval­uate the anticipated change in transformer lifetime. Since the inverteristhemainsourceofharmonicsandthemajorcauseof temperature rise above normal operation, care should be taken about different inverter designs, modulation techniques, and control schemes. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 

This paper addresses key concerns from electrical utilities with respect to operation of power transformers under condi­tions of reverse .ow and harmonic distortion triggered by re­newable generation, such as solar and wind. A two-step study of the electrical and thermal effects of solar panels on distribu­tion transformers is presented. In step one, a Matlab/Simulink model is built for a solar farm and its accommodating distribu­tion system based on Canadian utility data, including network topology and parameters. Different factors affecting waveform distortion across the distribution transformer are considered. 
Thethree-levelinvertertopologyemployingphase-to-ground voltage control is an excellent selection compromising mod­erate waveform distortion with design complexity. However, thetypeofpower-electronicdevicetobuildtheinverterdoesnot havemuchin.uenceonvoltageandcurrentTHD.VoltageTHD maintainsacceptablevaluesbelowstandardlimits,whereascur­rent THD is high at light loads and decreases with loading. Waveform distortion increases with the SP rating in reference to system capacity. Carrier frequency of sinusoidal PWM and cutoff frequency of the passive .lter needs to be carefully de­signed due to their impact on THD values and other perfor­mance characteristics. 
In case the solar farm rating is so high that many inverters are deployed, care should be taken on the number of active in­vertersatatime.Resonancebetweenacertainnumberof.lters couldgiverisetoabruptlyhighTHD values.The transformer windingcon.gurationhassomeimpactonwaveformdistortion, especiallythevectorgroupofthewinding.Steponeofthiswork gives an insight on the harmonic distortion of voltage and cur­rent waveforms across a distributiontransformerdueto SPand associated inverters. 
Insteptwo,transformerperformanceismeasuredinthelabo­ratoryundernormalandSPoperatingconditions.Experimental results, recorded during step two, match simulation .ndings of step one with respect to the effects of SP output power and winding con.guration on waveform distortion. Under the worst case loading scenario of full-load second-quadrant SP operation, the winding hottest-spot temperature would be 
1.2 
C higher than normal conditions. Such a small increase in temperature rise can yield a reduction of 8.3% in the life­time expectancy of distribution transformers. This .nding is critical to utilities experiencing increasing penetration of SPs into distribution networks. In order to maintain normal lifetime expectancy, distribution transformers must not be con­nected to SP of equal or higher aggregate capacity. Otherwise, energy-storagedevicesmaybeinstalledinordertopreventhar­monic-distorted second-quadrant operation of the transformer at full load. It should be highlighted that energy policies in many jurisdictions worldwide allow up to 10-kW PV rooftop installationperresidentialcustomer.Thishasastrongpotential to overload distribution transformers with reverse .ows under harmonic distortion. 
The contribution of this paper is to quantify the different sources of harmonics affecting the performance of distribution networks and transformers as a result of integrating SP genera­tors.Then,suchquanti.cationisemployedinalaboratorysetup to assess the reduction in lifetime expectancy of a distribution transformersubjecttoreversepower .ow andharmonicdistor­tioncausedby SPintegration.Awell-de.nedsetofprocedures todeterminechanges intransformerlifetimeexpectancydueto variations in loading scenarios is also given. 
REFERENCES 
[1] O. Ellabban, H. Abu-Rub, and F. Blaabjerg, “Renewable energy resources: Current status, future prospects and their enabling tech­nology,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 39, pp. 748–764, 2014. 
[2] D.M.SaidandK.M.Nor,“Effectsofharmonicsondistributiontrans­formers,”inProc. Austral. Univ. Power Eng. Conf.,Sydney,Australia, Dec. 14–17, 2008, pp. 1–5. 
[3] M.S.Dalila,M.N.Khalid,andM.Md.Shah,“Distributiontransformer lossesevaluationundernon-linearload,”inProc. Austral. Univ. Power Eng. Conf.,Adelaide,Australia,Sep.27–30,2009,pp.1–6. 
[4] E. Emanuel and X. Wang, “Estimation of loss of life of power trans­formerssupplyingnonlinearloads,”IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst.,vol. PAS-104, no. 3, pp. 628–636, Mar. 1985. 
[5] P.S.Moses,M.A.S.Masoum,andK. M. Smedley, “Harmoniclosses andstressesofnonlinearthree-phasedistribution transformersserving plug-in electric vehicle charging stations,” in Proc. IEEE-PES Conf. Innovative Smart Grid Technol.,Anaheim,CA,USA,Jan.17–19,2011, pp. 1–6. 
[6] M. Bagheri,M.S.Naderi,T.Blackburn,andT.B.Phung,“Trans­formeref.ciencyandde-ratingevaluationwithnon-sinusoidalloads,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Power System Technol., Auckland, New Zealand, Oct. 30–Nov. 2, 2012, pp. 1–6. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWERDELIVERY,VOL. 31,NO.3, JUNE 2016 
[7] S. Taheri, H. Taheri, I. Fofana, H. Hemmatjou, and A. Gholami, “Ef­fectofpowersystem harmonicson transformerloadingcapabilityand hotspottemperature,” in Proc. IEEE Can. Conf. Elect. Comput. Eng., Montreal, QC, Canada, Apr. 29–May 2, 2012, pp. 1–4. 
[8] S.Ram,J.A.C.Forrest,and G. W. Swift, “Effectsofharmonics on converter transformer load losses,” IEEE Trans. Power Del.,vol.3, no. 3, pp. 1059–1066, Jul. 1988. 
[9] Y. HanandY.-F.Liu,“Apracticaltransformercorelossmeasurement scheme for high-frequency power converter,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Elec­tron., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 941–948, Feb. 2008. 
[10] M.Shareghi,B. T. Phung,M.S.Naderi,T. R. Blackburn,andE. Am­bikairajah, “Effects of current and voltage harmonics on distribution transformerlosses,”inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Condition Monitor. Diag., Bali, Indonesia, Sep. 23–27, 2012, pp. 633–363. 
[11] F. Separi, M. Samakush, and A. R. Vahabzadeh, “Assessment of power distribution transformers electrical and thermal parameters in harmonic environments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Telecommun. Energy, Incheon, Korea, Oct. 18–22, 2009, pp. 1–4. 
[12] S.Masri,M.M.Azizan,andM. K.M.Jamil,“Measuringtemperature rise at transformer core under nonlinear loading,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Elect., Control, Comput. Eng., Pahang, Malaysia, Jun. 21–22, 2011, pp. 333–337. 
[13] A.H. Choudhury,W.M.Grady,andE. F. Fuchs, “Aninvestigationof the harmonics characteristics of transformer excitation current under nonsinusoidalsupplyvoltage,”IEEE Trans. Power Del.,vol.14,no.2, pp. 450–458, Apr. 1999. 
[14] G.W.Massey,“Estimationmethodsforpowersystemharmoniceffects onpowerdistributiontransformer,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl.,vol.30,no. 2, pp. 485–489, Apr. 1994. 
[15] P.N.Korovesis,G.A.Vokas,I.F.Gonos,andF.V.Topalis,“In.uence of large-scale installation of energy saving lamps on the line voltage distortion of a weak network supplied by photovoltaic station,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1787–1793, Oct. 2004. 
[16] E.VasanasongandE.D.Spooner,“Theeffectofnetharmoniccurrents producedby numbersoftheSydneyOlympicVillage'sPV systemson thepowerqualityoflocalelectricalnetwork,”inProc. Int. Conf. Power Syst. Technol.,Perth,Australia,Dec.4–7, 2000, pp.1001–1006. 
[17] G. A. Vokas and A. V. Machias, “Harmonic voltages and currents on twoGreekislandswithphotovoltaicstations:Studyand.eldmeasure­ments,”IEEE Trans. Energy Convers.,vol.10,no.2,pp.302–306,Jun. 1995. 
[18] M. A. Awadallah, B. Venkatesh, and B. N. Singh, “Impact of solar panels on power quality of distribution networks and transformers,” IEEE Can. J. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2015. 
[19] L. V. Nguyen, H. D. Tran, and T. T. Johnson, “Virtual protoryping for distributed control of a fault-tolerant modular multilevel inverter for photovoltaics,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 841–850, Dec. 2014. 
[20] F. Filho, L. M. Tolbert, Y. Cao, and B. Ozpineci, “Real-time selec­tiveharmonicminimizationformultilevelinvertersconnectedtosolar panels using arti.cial neural network angle generation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 2117–2124, Sep. 2011. 
[21] F. L. Luo and H. Ye, “Laddered multilevel DC/AC inverters used in solar panel energy systems,” IET Power Electron., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 1769–1777, 2013. 
[22] Z. Liang, R. Guo, J. Li, and A. Q. Huang, “A high-ef.ciency PV module-integrated DC/DC converter for PV energy harvest in FREEDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 897–909, Mar. 2011. 
[23] Y.Liu,B.Ge,H.Abu-Rub,andF.Z.Peng,“Controlsystemdesignof battery-assistedquasi-Z-sourceinverterforgrid-tiephotovoltaicpower generation,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy,vol. 4,no.4,pp. 994–1001, Oct. 2013. 
[24] B.B. J.D.Retnam,A.G.N.Gounder, andV.A.Gounden,“Hybrid power electronic controller for combined operation of constant power and maximum power point tracking for single-phase grid-tied photo-voltaic systems,” IET Power Electron., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 3007–3016, 2014. 
[25] IEEE Recommended Practice for Establishing Liquid-Filled and Dry-Type Power and Distribution Transformer Capability When Supplying Nonsinusoidal Load Currents,IEEE Standard C57.110-2008,2008. 
[26] IEEE Guide for Loading Dry-Type Distribution and Power Trans­formers, IEEE Standard C57.96-1999, 1999. 
[27] IEEE Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil-Immersed Transformers and Step-Voltage Regulators, IEEE Standard C57.91-2011, 2011. 

AWADALLAH et al.:ONTHEEFFECTSOFSOLARPANELSONDISTRIBUTIONTRANSFORMERS 1185 

Mohamed A. Awadallah was born in Zagazig, Egypt, in 1971. He received the B.S. (Hons.) and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Zagazig, Zagazig, Egypt, in 1993 and 1997, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA, in 2004. 
Currently, he is a Visiting Research Fellow with the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada. His research interests include motordrives, smart grids, and renewable energy. Dr.AwadallahisamemberofEtaKappaNu,TauBetaPi,andPhiKappaPhi. 

Tianqi Xu was born in Yunnan, China, in 1978. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Huazhong University of Science and Tech­nology, Wuhan, China, in 2009. 
Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the De­partment of Electrical and Information Engineering, Yunnan University of Nationalities, Kunming, Yunnan, China. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada, from 2011 to 2013. His re­searchinterestsincludesmartgrids,relayprotection, and communication systems for power systems. 


Bala Venkatesh (SM’08) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Anna University, Chennai, India, in 2000. 
He is a Professor and Academic Director of the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada. His research interests include power system analysis and optimization. He is aRegisteredProfessionalEngineerintheProvincesof Ontario and New Brunswick, Canada. 

Birendra N. Singh received the M.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from the Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NF,Canada,in 1984. 
He taught electrical engineering courses at Ry­erson University, Toronto, ON, Canada. Currently, he is IESO Distinguished Research Fellow at the Centre for Urban Energy, Ryerson University. He was Manager of Technology Development, Hydro One Networks Inc., Toronto, at the time the work was carried out on this paper. He has more than 30 years of diversi.ed experience in the electric utility 
industry with Newfoundland and Labrador Hydro, St. John’s; Toronto Hydro, 
Toronto;and Hydro One, Toronto. He is a Registered Professional Engineer in 
the Province of Ontario, Canada. 

Authorized licensed use limited to: Temple University. Downloaded on June 15,2022 at 01:44:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 

